tvaṃ hi brahmaiva sākṣāt paramurumahimannakṣarāṇāmakāra-
stāro mantreṣu rājñāṃ manurasi muniṣu tvaṃ bhṛgurnārado'pi |
prahlādo dānavānāṃ paśuṣu ca surabhi: pakṣiṇāṃ vainateyo
nāgānāmasyanantassurasaridapi ca srotasāṃ viśvamūrte ||1||
tvaṃ hi brahma-	Thou alone are Brahmaa
eva sākṣāt param-	indeed perceptible Supreme
uru-mahiman	O Thou of Infinite Glory!
akṣarāṇām-akāra:	among letters (Thou are) 'A'
tāra: mantreṣu	Om among Mantras
rājñāṃ manu:-asi	among kings are Manu
muniṣu tvaṃ bhṛgu:-	among sages Thou are Bhrigu
nārada:-api	and also Naarada
prahlāda: dānāvānāṃ	Prahlaad (Thou) are among Asuras
paśuṣu ca surabhi:	among animals are Surabhi (the celestial cow)
pakṣiṇāṃ vainateya:	among birds are Garuda
nāgānām-asi-ananta:-	among serpents are Ananta
surasarit-api ca srotasāṃ	and among rivers are also Gangaa
viśvamūrte	the world personified Thou!
O Thou of infinite Glory! Of whom the world is a personification! Thou alone are Brahmaa perceptible. Among letters Thou are 'A'. Among Mantraas Thou are Om. Among kings Thou are Manu and among sages are Bhrigu and also Naarada. Among Asuras Thou are Prahlaad. Thou are the Surabhi celestial cow among the animals and Garuda among the birds. Among serpents Thou are Ananta. Among the rivers Thou are the heavenly Gangaa.
brahmaṇyānāṃ balistvaṃ kratuṣu ca japayajño'si vīreṣu pārtho
bhaktānāmuddhavastvaṃ balamasi balināṃ dhāma tejasvināṃ tvam |
nāstyantastvadvibhūtervikasadatiśayaṃ vastu sarvaṃ tvameva
tvaṃ jīvastvaṃ pradhānaṃ yadiha bhavadṛte tanna kiñcit prapañce ||2||
brahmaṇyānāṃ bali:-tvaṃ	of the ones devoted to the holy, Thou are Bali
kratuṣu ca japa-yajña:-asi	and among sacrifices, are Japayoga
vīreṣu pārtha:	among heroes are Arjun
bhaktānām-uddhava:tvaṃ	among devotees Thou are Uddhava
balam-asi balināṃ	strength Thou are of the strong
dhāma tejasvināṃ tvam	grandeur of the majestic are Thou
na-asti-anta:-	there is no end
tvat-vibhūte:-	to Thy manifested glories
vikasat-atiśayaṃ	outstanding and brilliant
vastu sarvaṃ tvam-eva	all things are Thou alone
tvaṃ jīva:-tvaṃ pradhānaṃ	Thou are jiva and Thou are Prakriti
yat-iha bhavat-ṛte	what so ever is here, without Thee
tat-na kiñcit prapañce	that is not at all in this Universe
Among persons devoted to the holy men, Thou are Bali, among sacrifices Japayoga, among heroes Arjuna, among devotees Thou are Uddhava. Thou are the strength of the strong and grandeur of the majestic. There is no end to Thy manifested glories. All things brilliant and outstanding are Thee alone. Thou are jiva and Prakriti. There is nothing in this cosmos which is bereft of Thee.
dharmaṃ varṇāśramāṇāṃ śrutipathavihitaṃ tvatparatvena bhaktyā
kurvanto'ntarvirāge vikasati śanakai: santyajanto labhante |
sattāsphūrtipriyatvātmakamakhilapadārtheṣu bhinneṣvabhinnaṃ
nirmūlaṃ viśvamūlaṃ paramamahamiti tvadvibodhaṃ viśuddham ||3||
dharmaṃ-varṇa-āśramāṇāṃ	of the (4) castes and the (4) ashramas
śruti-patha-vihitaṃ	(duties) in the Vedic paths laid down
tvat-paratvena bhaktyā	toward Thee with devotion
kurvanta:-anta:-virāge	performing, within detachment
vikasati śanakai:	matures gradually
santyajanta: labhante	(then) giving up these, gets
sattā-sphūrti-priyatva-	Existence,Consciousness, Bliss
ātmakam-akhila-	consisting, in endless
padārtheṣu bhinneṣu-	objects different
abhinnaṃ nirmūlaṃ viśvamūlaṃ	(in reality), not different, uncaused, the cause of the universe
paramam-aham-iti	supreme I am thus
tvat-vibodhaṃ-viśuddhaṃ (labhante)	Reality knowledge clear (achieve)
People in the four casts and the four aashramas, who perform their duties, as laid down in the Vedas, according to their station in life, with devotion and dedication to Thee, to them non-attachment sprouts and matures gradually. When they are fully non-attached, they give up these duties and attain the true knowledge of Thee. Which is the experience that they are That Supreme Being of the nature of Existence Consciousness and Bliss, the one indivisible in the divided entities and the cause of all but not caused by anything.
jñānaṃ karmāpi bhaktistritayamiha bhavatprāpakaṃ tatra tāva-
nnirviṇṇānāmaśeṣe viṣaya iha bhavet jñānayoge'dhikāra: |
saktānāṃ karmayogastvayi hi vinihito ye tu nātyantasaktā:
nāpyatyantaṃ viraktāstvayi ca dhṛtarasā bhaktiyogo hyamīṣām ||4||
jñānaṃ karma-api bhakti:-	knowledge, action and devotion
tritayam-iha	these three here
bhavat-prāpakaṃ	towards achieving Thee, lead
tatra-tāvat-	here then
nirviṇṇānām-aśeṣe	altogether detached towards all
viṣaya iha bhavet	objects, here will be
jñāna-yoge-adhikāra:	path of knowledge suitable
saktānāṃ karma-yoga:-	for attached people path of action
tvayi hi vinihita:	in Thee alone dedicated
ye tu na-atyanta-saktā:	those who are not very attached
na-api-atyantaṃ viraktā:-	not also very detached
tvayi ca dhṛtarasā:	and in Thee hold devotion
bhaktiyoga: hi-amīṣām	path of devotion alone is for such (people)
The three paths which lead to Thy attainment, in this world are, knowledge (Gyaana), action (Karma) and devotion (Bhakti). Those who are fully dispassionate towards everything in life, are competent for Gyaana marg. People who are subject to worldly attachments may take the path of Karma and dedicate all their doings to Thee. To those who are neither intensely attached nor intensely dispassionate and also experience joy in thinking of Thee, the path of Bhaakti is prescribed.
jñānaṃ tvadbhaktatāṃ vā laghu sukṛtavaśānmartyaloke labhante
tasmāttatraiva janma spṛhayati bhagavan nākago nārako vā |
āviṣṭaṃ māṃ tu daivādbhavajalanidhipotāyite martyadehe
tvaṃ kṛtvā karṇadhāraṃ gurumanuguṇavātāyitastārayethā: ||5||
jñānaṃ tvat-bhaktatāṃ vā	knowledge or devotion to Thee
laghu sukṛta-vaśāt	easily as a result of good deeds
martya-loke labhante	in this world of mortals, (people) get
tasmāt-tatra-eva	therefore there only
janma spṛhayati	birth desires
bhagavan	O God!
nākago nārako vā	the one in heaven or the one in hell
āviṣṭaṃ māṃ tu	to me who has entered indeed
daivāt-	by good fortune
bhava-jala-nidhi-potāyite	like a boat to cross the world ocean
martya-dehe	the body of a human
tvaṃ kṛtvā karṇadhāraṃ gurum-	Thou making the pilot a Guru
anuguṇa-vātāyita:-	(Thou) favourable wind becoming
tārayethā:	take me across
In this mortal world, as a result of good deeds, one easily gets knowledge or devotion to Thee. O God! Therefore, those in heaven, or those in hell, desire to be born here only. By good fortune, I have this human body which is like a boat for crossing the ocean of Sansaara, (the world). Making my Guru the pilot of this boat, and Thyself becoming the favourable wind, deign to take me across.
avyaktaṃ mārgayanta: śrutibhirapi nayai: kevalajñānalubdhā:
kliśyante'tīva siddhiṃ bahutarajanuṣāmanta evāpnuvanti |
dūrastha: karmayogo'pi ca paramaphale nanvayaṃ bhaktiyoga-
stvāmūlādeva hṛdyastvaritamayi bhavatprāpako vardhatāṃ me ||6||
avyaktaṃ mārgayanta:	the non-manifest (Brahman) seeking
śrutibhi:-api nayai:	through Vedas and also Nyaaya Shaastras etc.,
kevala-jñāna-lubdhā:	only to (the path of) knowledge (who are) attracted
kliśyante-atīva	labour hard
siddhiṃ bahutara-januṣām-	ultimate goal, many lives'
ante-eva-āpnuvanti	at the end only achieve
dūrastha: karma-yoga:-	and far fetched is Karma Yoga
api ca paramaphale	also from ultimate goal
nanu-ayaṃ bhakti-yoga:-	certainly this Bhakti Yoga
tu-āmūlāt-eva hṛdya:-	indeed from the beginning alone is attractive
tvaritamayi bhavat-prāpaka:-	and very quickly to Thee leads
vardhatāṃ me	that (Bhakti Yoga) may grow in me
People who are attracted to the path of knowledge (Gyaana Yoga) seeking the non-manifest Brahman, by studying the Vedic revelations and Nyaaya Shaastra's logic, labour hard, and attain the ultimate goal at the end of many life times. Karma Yoga is far fetched from the ultimate goal. Certainly the path of devotion is sweet from the very beginning and quickly leads a devotee to Thee. May this Bhakti grow more and more in me.
jñānāyaivātiyatnaṃ munirapavadate brahmatattvaṃ tu śṛṇvan
gāḍhaṃ tvatpādabhaktiṃ śaraṇamayati yastasya mukti: karāgre |
tvaddhyāne'pīha tulyā punarasukaratā cittacāñcalyaheto-
rabhyāsādāśu śakyaṃ tadapi vaśayituṃ tvatkṛpācārutābhyām ||7||
jñānāya-eva-ati-yatnaṃ	for knowledge alone great effort
muni:-apavadate	sage Vyaas decries
brahmatattvaṃ tu śṛṇvan	to Brahma Tatva listening to
gāḍhaṃ tvat-pāda-bhaktiṃ	intense in Thy feet devotion (and)
śaraṇam-ayati ya:-	refuge with firmness who (takes)
tasya mukti: karāgre	his liberation is at hand
tvat-dhyāne-api-iha	in Thy meditation also, here,
tulyā puna:-asukaratā	comparatively again is difficulty
citta-cāñcalya-heto:	mind's wavering due to
abhyāsāt-āśu	by practice soon
śakyaṃ tat-api	possible that also
vaśayituṃ	to master
tvat-kṛpā-cārutābhyām	by Thy grace and Thy enchanting form
Sage Vyaasa decries excessive effort for seeking knowledge alone. Whoever, after learning from the scriptures or from a Guru the truth of Brahma, one who takes refuge with firmness in devotion at Thy feet, to him liberation is at hand. Meditation on Thee is no less difficult , because of the wavering nature of the mind, but can be mastered soon with practice, with Thy grace and with the attractiveness of Thy enchanting form.
nirviṇṇa: karmamārge khalu viṣamatame tvatkathādau ca gāḍhaṃ
jātaśraddho'pi kāmānayi bhuvanapate naiva śaknomi hātum |
tadbhūyo niścayena tvayi nihitamanā doṣabuddhyā bhajaṃstān
puṣṇīyāṃ bhaktimeva tvayi hṛdayagate maṅkṣu naṅkṣyanti saṅgā: ||8||
nirviṇṇa: karmamārge	disinterested in the path of Vedic rituals
khalu viṣamatame	indeed most difficult
tvat-kathā-ādau ca	and in Thy stories, narrations etc.,
gāḍhaṃ jāta-śraddha:-api	firmly placing faith also
kāmān-ayi bhuvanapate	the desires, O Lord of the Universe
na-eva śaknomi hātuṃ	not altogether am able to abandon
tat-bhūya: niścayena	there again with determination
tvayi nihitamanā	in Thee fixing my mind
doṣa-buddhyā bhajan-tān	knowing their harmfulness, indulging in them
puṣṇīyāṃ bhaktim-eva	(I will) strengthen devotion only
tvayi hṛdayagate	(when) Thou do abide in the heart
maṅkṣu naṅkṣyanti saṅgā:	soon are destroyed attachments
O Lord of the Universe! Becoming disinterested in the difficult path of Vedic rituals, I will firmly place my faith in the narrations of Thy stories etc. Even then, if I am not able to give up desires,I will indulge in them with the awareness of their harmfulness and again with determination fixing my mind in Thee, will strengthen my devotion. When Thou do abide in the heart, attachments are soon destroyed.
kaścit kleśārjitārthakṣayavimalamatirnudyamāno janaughai:
prāgevaṃ prāha vipro na khalu mama jana: kālakarmagrahā vā|
ceto me du:khahetustadiha guṇagaṇaṃ bhāvayatsarvakārī-
tyuktvā śānto gatastvāṃ mama ca kuru vibho tādṛśī cittaśāntim ||9||
kaścit kleśa-arjita-	some one, with hard work earned
artha-kṣaya-vimala-mati:-	money, losing it, the pure minded
nudyamāna: janaughai:	being pestered by the populace
prāk-evaṃ prāha vipra:	once, like this said the Brahmin,
na khalu mama jana:	not indeed to me, people
kāla-karma-grahā vā	time, action or planets (are)
ceta: me du:kha-hetu:-	my mind (is) cause of my sorrow
tat-iha guṇagaṇaṃ	this here the gunas
bhāvayat-sarvakārī-	super imposing, does everything
iti-uktvā	thus saying
śānta: gata:-tvāṃ	peacefully attained Thee
mama ca kuru vibho	to me also do O Lord!
tādṛśīṃ cittaśāntim	that kind of peace of mind
A Brahmin, who had earned wealth with hard toil once, happened to lose it all. He had acquired discrimination and purity of mind, but was persecuted by the populace. He said that the people, or time, or Karmaa or planets were not the cause of his sorrow. His own mind was the cause, it being a product of the gunas. It super imposes the gunas on the ever free aatman and attributes to it the doer ship. With this knowledge he peacefully attained to Thee. O Lord! may I have that kind of peace of mind.
aila: prāgurvaśīṃ pratyativivaśamanā: sevamānaściraṃ tāṃ
gāḍhaṃ nirvidya bhūyo yuvatisukhamidaṃ kṣudrameveti gāyan |
tvadbhaktiṃ prāpya pūrṇa: sukhataramacarattadvaduddhūtasaṅgaṃ
bhaktottaṃsaṃ kriyā māṃ pavanapurapate hanta me rundhi rogān ||10||
aila: prāk-urvaśīṃ	King Pururavas (son of Ilaa) long ago, (towards) Urvashi
prati-ati-vivaśamanā:	towards greatly infatuated
sevamāna:-ciraṃ tāṃ	enjoying her company for long
gāḍhaṃ nirvidya bhūya:	intensely non attached becoming
yuvati-sukham-idaṃ	this sex enjoyment
kṣudram-eva-iti gāyan	is trivial indeed , thus asserting
tvat-bhaktiṃ prāpya	Thy devotion attained
pūrṇa: sukhataram-acarat-	and fulfilled happily moved about
tat-vat-uddhūta-saṅgaṃ	like him, free from all attachments and desires
bhaktottaṃsaṃ kriyā māṃ	a devotee of high order make me
pavanapurapate	O Lord of Guruvaayur!
hanta me rundhi rogān	alas! Remove all my diseases
King Pururavas (son of Ilaa), long ago was deeply infatuated by Urvashi and enjoyed her company for long. Then he developed total renunciation and asserted that sex enjoyment is trivial and wretched. He became fully devoted to Thee and was free of all attachments and feeling fulfilled he moved about freely as one liberated. O Lord of Guruvaayur! uprooting all my desires, make me the best of Thy devotees and free me of all my diseases.